Principles:

Incrementalism: Everything should have some way to upgrade other things and be upgraded in turn.
Encapsulation: Everything should encapsulate into standard objects for transfer, etc.
Unitasking: Everything should do one thing and do it well.
Tiers: Everything should have large numbers of tiers (16?  0 for vanilla, 1-15 for advanced?)

Goals:

Breeding: Player should be able to breed animals (cows) to do specific things.
Capsules: Player should be able to capture entities and store them as items.

Progression:

Player gets animal.
Player converts animal to breeding-type.
Player analyzes animal with... machine?  Item?  Either?
Player can breed animals together
    - Animals bred together give each other minimal stat boosts
    - Player can create totems that promote certain stat boosts for bred animals near them.
    - Stats can go up or down, but not down past a threshold
        - Certain items to breed them down past those thresholds?
Player can use certain animal products to breed next tier of animal.

Animals:

Cows (Bio-machines) -> Sheep (Colors and smallish items(?)) -> Pigs (Truffle-hunts/spawns items)
    -> chickens (Effects) -> Wolfs/Cats (Combat) -> Bats (Related to enemies) ->Squid (Cosmetic)
    -> Rabbits (Cosmetic?) -> Villagers (Trades/Building/Robot Servile Workforce)
    -> Various Mobs(?)
Horses (Transportation)
Slimes (Spawn blocks, like dirt or whatnot when fed, can eventually spawn eggs of other types?)
Custom mobs of various coolnesses, probably reskins of base animal-types, but possibly with
    particular specialties each?  (i.e., camels are like Cows, but can hold more processing queue)

Modpack:

Eventual goal is to create a 'skyblock' modpack where the player spawns on a bedrock plain,
with a single source of liquid slime.  Has to cultivate the slimes to create animals, and
to create the world by training the slimes to move in certain ways?

Tiering:

16 tiers of animals:
0 - Vanilla creature
1-3 - Basic stats
4-7 - Supernatural abilities
8-11 - Production (and massive speciation)
12-15 - Epic levels of production/automation

Getting to a higher tier is a matter of careful breeding, but moving to the next tier-set
will require a special condition to be met.  Probably specialized feed or breeding apparatus
or analyzing equipment.